How did you meet Picard?
Well, I met Picard when I was with O&R, and he had
been invited to London to talk about the Baptist
Captriest and to the scientific society. I guess
it was the Royal Society of
marine engineer or something like that, and so I
made a habit of attending these various meetings
of this type, and at that time I met him, and
we had brief discussion after the meeting, and I
asked him to join me the next next day, and we, at
that time, we had lunch and talked over the whole
plan and more or less developed this idea that this
is something that I would attempt to try to to
organize and sell this program to the Navy. And
that's how it began. It involved working with
people back in Washington and what we call Code
416, Gordon Mill, Martin Maxwell, people like
that who were in the oceanographic group there.
And also at that time there was a symposium meeting
in Washington and it was possible to fly Picard
over and have him give his presentation in
Washington and at this meeting we came up with a
resolution this was a civilian meeting but about
more or less oceanographic and Navy science and we
passed a revolution which
by this meaning that the Navy should get involved
in the Bathyscaphe Trieste and in deep
submergence, and this is more or less a resolution
you could carry around and say, well, this group
has favored this proposal, and you could talk to
the higher brass, and who were generally
receptive, but it's a matter of a lot of footwork
and knowing people to get something moving. And
mainly this seed money from ONR to get... Did you
keep up with the Trieste after it was purchased by
the Navy? Were you involved in any of its later
activities? Well, I was involved to the point
where it
was
transferred, purchased by the Navy, and shipped
back to San Diego to the Navy Electronics
Laboratory. And we had, at that time, we began
these series of dives, testing and so forth, off
San Diego. And it was my understanding that I would
be the chief scientist in charge of this project.
However, this didn't go in that direction.
Eventually,
I was somewhat delayed in getting back from When I
came back to NAL, a person named Reckonser had been
placed in charge of the project, and I was a
consultant to the project, but I didn't really
have control of it. I was involved with the
project, but I didn't have quite the control that I
wanted to have.
But I was involved with the project through the
time when we made the dive, a seven-mile dive in a
Challenger Deep.
So I was involved with the team, involved with the
Challenger Deep dive. I guess most of this is
probably described pretty well in that book that
Picard and I wrote called Seven Miles Down. Right.
Would you consider the Trieste your most
important activity while you were at NEAL?
Well,
I wrote my first paper, I guess, on sea floor
spreading at NEL. And I think my early ideas on
continental drift and plate tectonics, what is
now called plate tectonics, were perhaps more
important. But certainly the deep submergence
aspect was important because it was...
It doesn't show up because there really aren't any
publications from it except this book and a few
papers. But so far as playing an important role,
sort of being a catalyst and getting the Navy
involved in deep submergence, I think that was a
very important thing, the triage work. Describe
how you came up with your theory of the formation of
the Gulf of Mexico through rifting. You're
speaking of seafloor spreading. Well,
that's much later.
Once this idea of what we now call plate tectonics
was pretty well established in my in my mind. And it
was
pretty well made, obsolete all older models of
global tectonics. And aside from the problems of
the major dispersion of continents, there were
the problems involved in the development of the
Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico. And any model you
had, four of these The peripheral aspects of the
breakup of Pangea had to be solved, and also they
had to be solved in terms of plate tectonic rules,
that you're permitted to have rifts and large
shifts, which by older geology was not really
allowable to move things in horizontal
directions for great distances, and to explain
things mainly in terms of rotation and drifting.
Of course, the first person who took that great
liberty in this sort of field was Maureen Carey in
Tasmania in the late 1950s. And so once she more or
less sort of broke this field, we all were involved
in what are now regarded as sort of wild schemes to
explain such things as the Gulf of Mexico, which
apparently were these schemes we envisioned
where certainly not quite correct, they were the
right type of solution, were going in the right
direction. And so we got answers which were not
exactly correct, but more or less in the proper
ballpark. When, as one of the early workers, if I
may say so, with plate tectonics, When did you
first begin to contemplate the possibility of
continental drift and plate tectonics? Well, in
the early days of marine geology, there were
endless
surprises. And these surprises were such things
that the thickness of the ocean sediments was only
one-tenth of what it should be if the ocean's
basins were as old as the world. And the seamounts
were not, when we dredged them, as we did on
Operation High Jump with the work of Ed Hamilton,
but we went out there with the intention of
dredging the seamounts and dredging up fossils.
Well, this was a rather a
bizarre approach because you wouldn't think
that, I mean, if you were flying through an
airplane here, you wouldn't think of dropping a
dredge in the ground and getting fossils you could
recognize. But we thought we could do this. I mean,
we thought there was sufficient rationale to do
this. And in fact, we succeeded beautifully. We
got a beautiful collection of macro fossils,
resisted and so forth, too. demonstrate these
geos were not pre-Cambrian, very ancient
seamounts, as Harry Hess had supposed, but were
indeed very young, Cretaceous.
So this was, again, another surprise. And when you
have enough surprises, you can't be surprised
unless you have preconceived notion or
preconceived model. If you have no ideas at all,
then there are no surprises. But if you have ideas
and they're wrong, then you're surprised by what
you find. So when you have enough surprises, you
begin to suspect the whole model. And in 52, then, I
went to 53, I went to Japan for a year as a Fulbright
Fellow. And I began to work on some of the results
there in the Japanese Hydrographic Office,
particularly on the Northwest Pacific region.
the Japanese had developed this very nice
hydrographic chart from their wartime data, and I
revised this slightly and published it and tried
to describe the whole northwest Pacific. Well, it
became apparent to me that there was a certain
hierarchy of features
on the ocean floor, and in this hierarchy, the most
important features, the number one, the dominant
features, were well, first of all, the continents
and ocean basins were the primary features in the
world. But beyond that, then it was the trenches.
The trenches transected everything else. Once
you crossed a trench, you had a whole new type of
geology. And so in thinking about this and looking
at some of the seamount change, which appeared to
be diving into the trenches, I just
began to think that that under-threshing was
taking place, and these seamounts were being
consumed in the trenches, and this was a form of
continental drift. So I went to a continental
drift model, which I did then at that time in about
1952, and I guess it became a bit apparent in my GSA
paper in 1954. I didn't discuss continental drift
as such. that I guess that's when I first became
convinced of the reality of under-thrusting and
drift on a small scale. It wasn't until later when
we, after the mid-ocean ridges were recognized
and the rift was recognized, when it became
apparent that you had a model that would run if you
generated no ocean floor in the mid-ocean rifts.
And this was a conveyor belt thing. And this was a
process which I termed seafloor spreading, which
is a process which is now, the word is still
retained, although it's not really a good
description. I couldn't think of it. I didn't like
that expression to begin with. I searched for
something better.
use that use that term and the concept of seafloor
spreading is still
uh of course it's still the term is still used
uh so it's it's really in tokyo then in 53 when you
begin to put all put the pattern together yes
that's right now a tokyo experience is very
interesting because i arrived there and i
uh i did uh several things. I had the first scuba
equipment in Japan. I arrived there with an
underwater diving apparatus. I did a good deal of
diving in various parts of Japan,
including the pearl beds and some of the sacred
fishing grounds. The Japanese had never seen
self-contained breathing apparatus before, so
this was quite a remarkable thing to them. Second
thing I was concerned with in Japan is I, just
before I went there, we had this Navy had installed
this SOFAR system, experimentally, and we
received some explosions on the hydrophones off
California, and At that time, fishing boats had
reported an eruption on San Benedicto Island in
the Riviera Lajos off Mexico. And the
fishermen had reported this, but of course you
often see cloud plumes on tops of islands and there
are often false reports of eruptions. There was
sufficient evidence here to justify looking into
it further, and I found at the same time these
explosions had been arriving in the SOFAR system.
And it turns out later that these SOFAR, these
noises were not from Mexico, but were from Myojin
Sho off Japan. They had traveled some 8,000
kilometers beneath the sea, and they were
shielded from the receiving station in Oahu, but
they were received in these two stations off
California at Puerto Narguero and I guess
Mendocino, something like that. So we had a line of
position because we could see eventually that
these signals arrived from Japan. But in the
meantime, this aroused sufficient interest in
the eruptions off Mexico to justify trying to
investigate that. And this is sort of an
interesting exercise in trying to get something
done. Because we tried to get the Coast Guard to fly
down, and they were limited to flying 1,000 miles.
This was 1,200 miles away, just beyond their
limit. We couldn't get the Navy to act. The Navy
wouldn't
dispatch any flights, mainly because we had to go
through channels. And we were not allowed to
bypass, you know, we did all the time, but we were
not supposed to bypass any channels. And when you
go through channels, if you go through, say, four
channels to reach some person, your chances of
receiving a no answer go up each time. So it's sort
of a geometric thing. The man right above you might
say yes or no, but... If you go through this yes or no
process four times, your chances are one to one to
the fourth power, or two to the fourth power, or one
to 16. So anyway, we couldn't get the Navy to act. So
Gifford Ewing, at that time, he
made a long distance call to the Navy, to the Air
Force somewhere, and the Air Force had weather
flights. And so although we were naval
scientists, we got the Air Force to cooperate with
us and get aboard and divert a weather
reconnaissance flight to go down and see this
alleged eruption. And sure enough, it was a major
eruption. It was a new volcano being formed, which
is a rather remarkable event on this island.
And this was just before I went to Japan. It turned
out later that these noises we heard were not from
the sound, but were from Japan. So this became a
major project with me while in Japan to
investigate the Myojin Sho eruption and the
underwater transmission of sound associated
with that eruption, which was remarkable also
because it involved the loss of a ship being blown
up by this eruption. In fact, the scientist I was
supposed to work with in Japan was lost. He was the
chief scientist on the ship from the Hydrographic
Office of Japan, which was sent down to
investigate this eruption. And the entire ship
disappeared from the world, including 31 chief
scientists and 31 other people. And all that was
found was a life preserver and a few planks which
had embedded in them bits of volcanic rock. So the
ship had been destroyed by a volcanic explosion.
And on the SOFAR records, we had the explosion
pinpointed. There was one explosion on, I guess it
was September 23, 1952, at 1231 in the afternoon.
And that is obviously the explosion that the ship
got there. And this new island had sunk. And all
there was, presumably, was discolored water. And
they just went over the top of it. At that time, the
The volcano rather than exploding every hour or
so, it was maybe exploding once a day. It was in its
dying, waning stages. But the ship went up into the
discolored water and was blown up, engulfed by the
explosion.
And then it's after you leave Japan then that you go
to London. Yes, I was back then in the West Coast for
six months or so. Then I went to London from return
to the New Electronics Laboratory. and then went
to ONR London for four years. Okay, and then from
London you come back to the NEL lab. Yes, that's
right. Okay. And had there been any change in the
emphasis of the work of the lab by the time you
returned from London? Did they seem to be more
mission-oriented than they had been before, if
that were possible? They became perhaps more
mission-oriented. They were...
in a sense, but the Korean War was over, and during
the Korean War time, of course, we were highly
mission-oriented.
But oceanography had a bit of a brighter, it was
becoming sort of a darling science, and so it
received more support, particularly the
physical oceanography, but the field of marine
geology and geophysics received, again, almost
none. We really were not better off than before. It
was a very minimal sort of support.
We were the most visible group of oceanographers,
I think, in the entire Navy because we were doing a
lot of good work and publishing many papers.
We had a very, very fine group in those days.
Then in 1963, you go to NOAA. In 63, I left and went to
Washington, that's right, to NOAA, which was then
the Coast and Geodetic Survey. At that time, the
Coast Survey, well, a few years prior, they had
hired Harris Stewart, who's now our director
here, and he had had a Ph.D. from Scripps and was
also a student of Shepard's. and I guess he was
their instrumental but the Coast Survey suddenly
also became rather science-oriented for many
years they were prior to that they were not and
people in the Coast Survey who had did any any
publication at all were few and far between there
was Gibson and Jordan and these people just wrote
their scientific papers at night they kind of did
all this work, they weren't allowed to do any sort
of scientific work in their normal mission. But
this began to change in the late 50s, and
then in the early 60s, the Coast Survey organized
what they, what was called a, it was sort of a
scientific staff, which was supposed to, which
had as a mission to do scientific work. basic
research. We were sort of a consulting staff. And I
was asked by Stuart to come and join that group, and
so I did at that time. This
was beginning of sort of the scientific
involvement of the... The co-survey was very
hidebound, very traditional organization. And
they were
by law, they could not investigate, they only
could investigate the continental shelf by
congressional terms of reference. And this is
partly a matter, I guess, of jealousy between
services as to who does what. Now the world was
divided up between the hydrographic office and
the co-survey. And the co-survey, extended their
mission a little bit. They defined the shelf as
extending to 2,000 fathoms, so they could at least
investigate the continental slope. But their
main mission was making hydrographic surveys,
and they didn't really bother to even contour up
their boat sheets. And this is what, for example,
Sherford was doing in the early days. He was taking
this basic data. And, well, for many years, the
close survey ran lines of sounding across the Gulf
of Alaska and
up to the Alaskan region for some 20 years or so, and
they had these lines of soundings, but it remained
for Bill Menard and I to make a bathymetric map.
They didn't ever bother to make a bathymetric map
of their deep sea data, so they had this single
mission of of collecting soundings and making
nautical charts, but not extending their work
beyond that.
Is NOAA too big or too small? NOAA?
Well,
it's a little hard to say. We're, of course,
something called the environmental research
laboratories, of which we are one of perhaps a
dozen. And I saw something a few years ago
indicating there were something over 600, 700
scientists,
people who were labeled as
in one way or another being in the scientific
category. Now I suppose that number might be close
to 1,000, a bit more even. No, it's not too big. I
guess everyone has their ideas about how things
should be organized or reorganized.
I think from where I sit in the field of marine
geology, we think that the, well, we think in the
NOAA, the ocean side of NOAA has been not
emphasized enough. It's the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, but it's mainly
become a super weather bureau. The weather, the
meteorology part is much more important than the
oceanic part. And the main, of course,
laboratories in oceanography are this
laboratory, the main one, plus a smaller group in
Seattle. And even within the oceanography, we
really don't do the things that I wish we had or
could do that's involved in deep ocean. And we're
doing almost nothing in the deep ocean. And
for many years, we were sort of more or less
competing with the geological survey to be the
lead agency for the government in marine geology
and geophysics. And I think mainly by... lack of
funding, lack of action, the U.S. National Survey
has moved into that role, which perhaps is what it
should be, but we always hoped that we would, since
we do have many things in our favor, we have an
officer corps and we have the ships, and we have
ships which have ocean keeping and deep sea
capabilities, we feel it should be involved in
deep sea missions which are proper for the types of
ships we have. We have, say, Class I oceanographic
vessels. The only program we have going now is
Peter Rona's program in marine geology on the
Mid-Atlantic Raids, the TAG program.